
<#pagebreak>

## Introduction

Sparv is an annotation tool developed by Spr√•kbanken that is used for analysing
the corpora in Korp and the texts in Strix. The [Sparv web interface](https://spraakbanken.gu.se/sparv) can be used for annotating your own texts.

This user manual describes most of the functions available in the Sparv web
interface. There are also exercises in Swedish [available for download](https://svn.spraakdata.gu.se/sb-arkiv/pub/dokumentation/sparv/exercises/sparvovningar_hw2017.pdf).

To make a Sparv analysis you can just type or paste some text into the text
field (or hit one of the example buttons) and then press the green
**Run** button. When the analysis is done the result is shown as a table
below the text input field.

![The Sparv web interface](https://svn.spraakdata.gu.se/sb-arkiv/pub/dokumentation/sparv/img/sparv_granssnitt_en.png){width=550px style="margin-left: 10px;"}

<#pagebreak>

## Quick Settings

The check boxes under the text input field can be used to quickly select or
deselect different types of annotations. For example, if you would like to
exclude the dependency trees from the result you can deselect the dependency
analysis check box.

Above the text field you can choose between plain text or XML input. If your
text already has some mark-up you need to select XML, otherwise all existing
annotations will be lost after the analysis.

## Result View

When the analysis is done the result is shown as a table below the text input
field. Each column represents one type of analysis on word level. When hovering
over the names in the table header a short explanation is displayed. The
same goes for many abbreviations used in the analysis, e.g. the labels in the
dependency analysis, the named entity categories and the morphosyntactic tags.

The dependency analysis is displayed as a dependency tree in the beginning of
every sentence in addition to the dependency relations being shown in the result
table. Structural attributes, i.e. analyses that can stretch across several words
or the entire text (e.g. readability metrics or name tags) are shown as XML tags
in the table.

By pressing the **XML** button above the result table you can download the analysis in XML format.

![A completed Sparv analysis](https://svn.spraakdata.gu.se/sb-arkiv/pub/dokumentation/sparv/img/sparv_resultat_en.png){width=550px style="margin-left: 10px;"}

<#pagebreak>

## Analysis Modes

Below the Sparv logo you can find a dropdown menu for picking the language of
analysis. This menu lets you analyse texts written in other languages than
Swedish. Currently Sparv supports 20 different languages but most of them only support part-of-speech tagging and lemmatisation.

Sparv has an analysis mode for annotating Swedish texts from the 1800's. In this
mode information from two older dictionaries (Dalin and Swedberg) is used in
order to obtain better analyses for words with older spelling.

![The language picker](https://svn.spraakdata.gu.se/sb-arkiv/pub/dokumentation/sparv/img/sparv_sprakvaljare_en.png){width=200px style="float: right; margin-left: 10px;"}

## Advanced Settings

When analysing texts without any mark-up it is often enough to paste the text in
the input field and hit the **Run** button. If the text contains XML you need to
adjust the settings in order to let Sparv know what the different tags in your
data represent.

You can open the settings by clicking on **Show advanced settings**. Then you
can specify if the segmentation into paragraphs, sentences, and words should be
done automatically or if existing tags should be used instead. You can also
specify the name of the document element and enter additional tags and
attributes that are available in your input data. Any tags and attributes not specified in the settings will be removed from the result.

The advanced settings let you control exactly which analyses should be included
in the result. You can select and deselect analyses by clicking on the different
attributes. E.g. if you are only interested in the readability metric **lix**
you can deselect **ovix** and **nk** in the advanced settings. If you want to
know more about a setting you can click on the question mark beside it and a
short explanation will be displayed. The reset button allows you to return to
the default settings.

![The advanced settings in XML mode](https://svn.spraakdata.gu.se/sb-arkiv/pub/dokumentation/sparv/img/sparv_installningar_en.png){width=550px}

<#pagebreak>

## File Upload

Instead of feeding text directly into the text field you can use the file upload
mode by pressing the **Upload** button. Valid input formats are txt (plain text)
and XML. Documents created with Microsoft Word or similar text processing
software cannot be analysed.

If you choose to upload XML files you will need to adjust the settings to keep
Sparv from interpreting your mark-up as text. You also need to adjust the
language of analysis if you upload text which is written in another language
than Swedish. Sparv allows for uploading multiple files at a time. The settings
and choice of language will be applied to all files analysed in the same run.

Some analyses take quite some time to process and if you don't want to wait that
long you can fill in your e-mail address and you will get an e-mail with a
download link as soon as the analysis is completed. If you have supplied your
e-mail address it is okay to close your browser while your text is being
processed.

In file upload mode the result is not shown as a table but instead you will be
able to download a zip file containing the annotated text in XML format.

![File upload mode](https://svn.spraakdata.gu.se/sb-arkiv/pub/dokumentation/sparv/img/sparv_uppladdning_en.png){width=400px style="margin-left: 10px;"}
